Totalitarianism
is any political system in which a citizen is totally subject to state authority in all aspects of day-to-day life.
Benito Mussolini
One of Europe's first major dictators. In 1919, after World War I, Mussolini founded Italy's Fascist Party. Known as Il Duce or "The Leader"
Fascism
Refers to authoritarian political movement which ruled Italy 1922-1943, under the leadership of Mussolini.
Vladimir Lenin
Leader of the Bolshevik Party in Russia. Established the Communist government throughout the Russian empire. In 1922, renamed these territories the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR).
Joseph Stalin
The Soviet dictator led the USSR through World War II.
Adolf Hitler
Leader of Nazi Germany during World War II.
Mein Kampf ("My Struggle")
Hitler's autobiography, in which Hitler calls for the unification of all Germans under one government. He claimed that Germans, particularly blond, blue-eyed Germans, belonged to a "master-race" called Aryans. Gave himself the title of the Führer or "leader."
Manchuria
Resource-rich province in northern China. Japanese military leaders targeted this province to seize.
The Nye Committee
Was responsible for documenting the huge profits that arms factories had made during the war. The report created the impression that these businesses influenced the United States to go to war. The European refusal to repay their loans and the Nye Committee's findings turned even more Americans toward isolationism.
Neutrality Act of 1935
The act made it illegal for Americans to sell arms to any country at war.
Francisco Franco
led a rebellion in Spain, after the coalition of Republicans, Socialists, and Communists had been elected.
Emperor Hirohito
The ruler of Japan during World War II.
General Tojo
The military ruler of Japan
Axis-Powers
Together Germany, Italy, and Japan became known as the Axis Powers, they did not formally become allies until September 1940.
Sudetenland
An area of Czechoslovakia with a large German-speaking population. Hitler announced German claims to this area and the Czechs strongly resisted Germany's demands for the Sudetenland.
Neville Chamberlain
British prime minister who publicly promised to support France, Britain's ally, against German unification. Promised "a peace with honor...peace in our time."
The Munich Conference
On September 29, 1938, Britain and France agreed to Hitler's demands, a policy that came to be known as appeasement.
Poland
After the Munich conference, Hitler turned his sights on Poland. Poland had been given Danzig (even though 90% of it had belonged to Germany) after World War I.
The Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression Pact
Stalin agreed to the nonaggression pact with Germany because he believed it was the best way to protect the USSR, and if the treaty worked, Germany would go to war against Britain and France, and the USSR would be safe. The treaty also contained a secret deal that said Germany and the USSR would split Poland between them.
Blitzkrieg
The Germans used a new type of warfare called blitzkrieg, or lightning war. Blitzkrieg used large number of massed tanks to break through and rapidly encircle enemy positions.
Rhineland
Area west of the Rhine River in which Hitler illegally sent troops.
Dunkirk
A small town in northern France near the Belgian border. This was the only port that the Germans had not captured and therefore it became the only hope for Britain and France to evacuate their surviving troops by sea.
Vichy Regime
The puppet government set up by Hitler in Southern France.
Marshall Petain
The head of the Vichy Regime.
Winston Churchill
Prime minister of Britain, who replaced Neville Chamberlain. Churchill rallied the British people to fight against the Nazis.
The Battle of Britain
The air battle between Britain and Germany that began in mid-August, 1940, and lasted into the fall of 1940.
Royal Air Force (R.A.F.)
Britain's Air Force
Hermann Goering
Head of the German air force, called the Luftwaffe.
Luftwaffe
Germany's Air Force
The Nuremberg Laws
Laws set up by the Nazis that took rights away for all Jews living in Nazi territory.
Gestapo
The Nazi governments secret police
Kristallnacht (night of broken glass)
The anti-Jewish violence that erupted throughout Germany and Austria on November 9, 1938.
Albert Einstein
In the early 1930s Albert Einstein was among the Jews who left Nazi Germany. Einstein was a pacifist who had opposed World War I; ironically he eventually would see his scientific ideas applied to the creation of the most powerful destructive weapon of the time, the atomic bomb.
Holocaust
Hitler's attempt to destroy the Jews in Europe during World War II. 35. Concentration Camps Detention centers where Jews and other "undesirables" were sent to either work as slave laborers until they dropped dead from exhaustion, disease, or malnutrition.
Concentration Camps
Detention centers where Jews and other "undesirables" were sent to either work as slave laborers until they dropped dead from exhaustion, disease, or malnutrition.
Extermination Camps
These were added to many concentration camps after the Conference discussing "the final solution" to make extermination of Jews more efficient for the Nazis.
The Neutrality Act of 1939
Warring nations could buy weapons from the United States only if they paid cash and carried the arms on their own ships.
The Lend-Lease Act
The United States would be able to lend or lease arms to any country considered "vital to the defense of the United States." This act meant that the United States could send weapons to Britain if Britain promised to return or pay rent for them after the war.
The Atlantic Charter
It committed the two leaders to a postwar world of democracy, non-aggression, free trade, economic advancement, and freedom of the seas.
Pearl Harbor
The place where the Japanese tried to destroy the United States Pacific Fleet in a sneak attack.
December 7, 1941
The date that the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor.
Admiral Yamamoto
Japanese admiral that planned the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor.
1941/1945
Years of United States involvement in World War II.
Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR)
President of the United States through most of World War II.
Selective Service and Training Act
First peacetime draft in the United States.
General George Marshall
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff fought the war from Washington D.C.
General Dwight Eisenhower
The supreme allied commander in Europe.
Operation Torch
The code name for the American invasion of North Africa.
Erwin Rommel
Germany's best field commander. Known as "The Desert Fox".
General Bernard Montgomery
Great Britain's best field general.
General George Patton
America's best field general. Known as "Old Blood and Guts."
General Mark Clark
General in charge of the Italian Campaign during World War II.
Operation Barbarossa
The code name for the German invasion of the USSR.
Stalingrad
The German defeat at this city was the turning point of the war in Europe.
D-Day/Operation Overlord
Codename for the Allied invasion of France.
June 6, 1944
The date of the Allied invasion of France.
Battle of the Bulge
The largest battle fought by the United States Forces in World War II, American victory. Coach Croft's father fought here.
Audie Murphy
Served in the European Theatre, is the most decorated soldier in the history of the United States.
V-E Day
Victory in Europe, May 8, 1945.
General Douglas MacArthur
The supreme Allied commander in the Pacific.
Chester Nimitz
Top Admiral in the United States Navy during World War II.
Coral Sea
First naval battle ever fought using only airplanes; this American victory stopped Japanese expansion towards Australia.
Guadalcanal
First time the American forces land on an island occupied by the Japanese; Americans learn that Japanese will not surrender.
Island Hopping
American strategy used to defeat Japan; Americans would only attack islands that would allow us to build bomber bases to attack Japan. The Allies followed a plan of attacking some islands controlled by Japan and skipping others.
Midway
The United States victory here was the turning point of the war in the Pacific.
Leyte Gulf
The victory in which the United States navy destroyed most of what was left of the Japanese navy.
Kamikaze
Japanese suicide planes, one plane one ship.
Asian Americans
During World War II, the United States government placed Japanese Americans in Internment Camps in California.
Korematsu v. United States
Supreme Court case that ruled relocation of Japanese Americans was constitutional because it was based on military urgency.
Bataan Death March
Took place in the Philippines.
Iwo Jima/Okinawa
Because of the heavy casualties suffered on these islands the Americans believed that invading Japan would be too costly, the decision is made to use the atomic bomb.
Ernie Pyle
Famous reporter for Stars and Stripes; he was killed in action on Okinawa
Manhattan Project
Code name for the development of the atomic bomb.
Dr. Oppenheimer
The man in charge of the Manhattan Project.
Harry S Truman
The American president that made the decision to drop the atomic bomb. Truman became president after Roosevelt died in office.
USS Indianapolis
Ship that delivered the atomic bomb to Tinian Island and was sunk by a Japanese sub.
Enola Gay
The B29 bomber that dropped the first atomic bomb.
Hiroshima
The city selected as the target for the first atomic bomb.
The Bock's Car
The B29 bomber that dropped the second atomic bomb.
Nagasaki
The city selected as the target for the second atomic bomb.
USS Missouri
Ship on which the Japanese surrendered at the end of World War II.
V-J Day
Victory in Japan, September 2, 1945.
